Page 12
CO3354 Introduction to natural language processing
2.2 Introduction
People communicate in many different ways: through speaking and listening,
making gestures, using specialised hand signals (such as when driving or directing
trafﬁc), using sign languages for the deaf, or through various forms of text.
By text we mean words that are written or printed on a ﬂat surface (paper, card,
street signs and so on) or displayed on a screen or electronic device in order to be
read by their intended recipient (or by whoever happens to be passing by).
This course will focus only on the last of these: we will be concerned with various
ways in which computer systems can analyse and interpret texts, and we will assume
for convenience that these texts are presented in an electronic format. This is of
course quite a reasonable assumption, given the huge amount of text we can access
via the World Wide Web and the increasing availability of electronic versions of
newspapers, novels, textbooks and indeed subject guides. This chapter introduces
some essential concepts, techniques and terminology that will be applied in the rest
of the course. Some material in this chapter is a little technical but no programming
is involved at this stage.
We will begin in section 2.3 by considering texts as strings of characters which can
be broken up into sub-strings, and introduce some techniques for informally
describing patterns of various kinds that occur in texts. Subsequently in section 2.4
we will begin to motivate the analysis of texts in terms of hierarchical structures in
which elements of various kinds can be embedded within each other, in a
comparable way to the elements that make up an HTML web document. This section
introduces some technical machinery such as: ﬁnite-state machines (FSMs), regular
expressions, regular grammars and context-free grammars.
2.3 Basic concepts
2.3.1 Tokenised text and pattern matching
One of the more basic operations that can be applied to a text is tokenising:
breaking up a stream of characters into words, punctuation marks, numbers and
other discrete items. So for example the character string
“Dr. Watson, Mr. Sherlock Holmes”, said Stamford, introducing us.
can be tokenised as in the following example, where each token is enclosed in single
quotation marks:
`"' `Dr.' `Watson' `,' `Mr.' `Sherlock' `Holmes' `"' `,'
`said' `Stamford' `,' `introducing' `us' `.'
At this level, words have not been classiﬁed into grammatical categories and we
have very little indication of syntactic structure. Still, a fair amount of information
may be obtained from relatively shallow analysis of tokenised text. For example,
suppose we want to develop a procedure for ﬁnding all personal names in a given
text. We know that personal names always start with capital letters, but that is not
enough to distinguish them from names of countries, cities, companies, racehorses

Page 13
Basic concepts
and so on, or from capitalisation at the start of a sentence. Some additional ways to
identify personal names include:
Use of a title Dr., Mr., Mrs., Miss, Professor and so on.
A capitalised word or words followed by a comma and a number, usually below
100: this is a common way of referring to people in news reports, where the
number stands for their age – for example Pierre Vinken, 61, . . .
A capitalised word followed by a verb that usually applies to humans: said,
reported, claimed, thought, argued . . . This can over-generate in the case of
country or organisation names as in the Crown argues or Britain claimed.
We can express these more concisely as follows, where jis the disjunction symbol,
Word stands for a capitalised word and Int is an integer:
(Dr. jProfessor jMr. jMrs. jMiss jMs) Word
Word Word, Int
Word (said jthought jbelieved jclaimed jargued j...)
Learning activity
1. Write down your own examples of names that match each of the above patterns.
2. Pick a newspaper article or webpage that provides a variety of examples of people’s names. Do they
match the patterns we have encoded above? If not, see if you can devise additional rules for
recognising names and write them out in a similar format.
2.3.2 Parts of speech
A further stage in analysing text is to associate every token with a grammatical
category or part of speech (POS). A number of different POS classiﬁcations have
been developed within computational linguistics and we will see some examples in
subsequent chapters. The following is a list of categories that are often encountered
in general linguistics: you will be familiar with many of them already from learning
the grammar of English or other languages, though some terms such as Determiner
or Conjunction may be new to you.
Noun ﬁsh, book, house, pen, procrastination, language
Proper noun John, France, Barack, Goldsmiths, Python
Verb loves, hates, studies, sleeps, thinks, is, has
Adjective grumpy , sleepy , happy , bashful
Adverb slowly , quickly , now, here, there
Pronoun I, you, he, she, we, us, it, they
Preposition in, on, at, by , around, with, without
Conjunction and, but, or, unless
Determiner the, a, an, some, many , few, 100

